Adds Minimal SnarkyJS checks part1 RFC (#5)
o1-labs/rfcs: 0003-minimal-snarkyjs-checks-part1.md

> ## Summary

Reviewer: As a reader of a document, I like to have the title more recognizable than "Summary" wdyt?

> ## Summary

Reviewer: template now had a heading level 1 to identify the RFC by name, UX change for readability and consumability

[summary]: #summary

> A minimal layer of SnarkyJS checks that won't break with typical protocol development.

Reviewer 2: Sentence fragment

How about:

"We describe a minimal layer of SnarkyJS check that won't hinder typical protocol development."

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Objective: Empower the protocol development to continue swiftly, while preventing maximally complex SnarkyJS bitrot. Out-of-scope for this RFC: re-enabling the rest of those tests in SnarkyJS CI, and changing the submodule layout within Mina.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objective: Empower the protocol development to continue swiftly while preventing maximally complex SnarkyJS bitrot. Out-of-scope for this RFC: re-enabling the rest of those tests in SnarkyJS CI and changing the submodule layout within Mina.
```

> Background: Currently, SnarkyJS and, transitively, SnarkyJS-bindings is included in the main Mina repo as a submodule. Until recently, extensive CI jobs ensured that SnarkyJS remains correct as Mina evolves. Unfortunately, this setup has many issues: (1) Mina is owned by the Mina Foundation and SnarkyJS is owned by O(1) Labs; it's semantically awkward to rely on Mina's CI for testing SnarkyJS, (2) the dependancy graph feels a bit inverted; as SnarkyJS is a client of the Mina daemon's internals rather than Mina daemon's internals being a client of SnarkyJS, and most importantly (3) it's causing velocity issues with protocol development. Why? Many parts of SnarkyJS is tightly coupled to zkApp representations and behavior -- this means that even trivial renaming or reordering of fields requires SnarkyJS changes (albeit in a semi-automatic fashion).

Reviewer 2: dependency

Reviewer 2: "are tightly coupled"

> Background: Currently, SnarkyJS and, transitively, SnarkyJS-bindings is included in the main Mina repo as a submodule. Until recently, extensive CI jobs ensured that SnarkyJS remains correct as Mina evolves. Unfortunately, this setup has many issues: (1) Mina is owned by the Mina Foundation and SnarkyJS is owned by O(1) Labs; it's semantically awkward to rely on Mina's CI for testing SnarkyJS, (2) the dependancy graph feels a bit inverted; as SnarkyJS is a client of the Mina daemon's internals rather than Mina daemon's internals being a client of SnarkyJS, and most importantly (3) it's causing velocity issues with protocol development. Why? Many parts of SnarkyJS is tightly coupled to zkApp representations and behavior -- this means that even trivial renaming or reordering of fields requires SnarkyJS changes (albeit in a semi-automatic fashion).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Background: Currently, SnarkyJS and, transitively, SnarkyJS-bindings are included in the main Mina repo as a submodule. Until recently, extensive CI jobs ensured that SnarkyJS remains correct as Mina evolves. Unfortunately, this setup has many issues: 

(1) Mina is owned by the Mina Foundation and SnarkyJS is owned by O(1) Labs; it's semantically awkward to rely on Mina's CI for testing SnarkyJS.
(2) The dependency graph feels a bit inverted, as SnarkyJS is a client of the Mina daemon's internals rather than Mina daemon's internals being a client of SnarkyJS.
(3) Most importantly, CI jobs are causing velocity issues with protocol development. Why? Many parts of SnarkyJS are tightly coupled to zkApp representations and behavior -- this means that even trivial renaming or reordering of fields requires SnarkyJS changes (albeit in a semi-automatic fashion).
```

Reviewer: let's improve readability with this suggested formatting

> Having said that, there are important reasons to keep some tests running on Mina's PRs: For example, many cryptography changes have the potential to cause proof generation on SnarkyJS, and by far the best place to address that is the PR introducing the cryptography change.

Reviewer 2: "to break proof generation" ?

> Having said that, there are important reasons to keep some tests running on Mina's PRs: For example, many cryptography changes have the potential to cause proof generation on SnarkyJS, and by far the best place to address that is the PR introducing the cryptography change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having said that, there are important reasons to keep some tests running on Mina's PRs: For example, many cryptography changes have the potential to break proof generation on SnarkyJS, and by far the best place to address that is the PR introducing the cryptography change.
```

> As of this RFC, all the SnarkyJS are configured to "soft-fail" on Mina's CI; this was a quickfix to empower quick Mina development, but is creating opportunities for bitrot in these situations so this RFC aims to quickly reconcile this temporary situation.

Reviewer: ummmm I am not sure what the subject of "all the SnarkyJS" refers to 

(updates?)

> Success Metric: Protocol developers are undisturbed by SnarkyJS tests in day-to-day development, but when deep changes to cryptography are taken, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Success Metric: Protocol developers are undisturbed by SnarkyJS tests in day-to-day development. However, when deep changes to cryptography are made, the following requirements apply.
```

Reviewer: something like this to introduce the requirements (I think we mean the requirements apply only to deep changes)

Requirements:

* The bare-bones SnarkyJS tests (as described below) run as blocking jobs on Mina PRs

> * Any SnarkyJS tests that are more tightly coupled to zkApps do not block Mina CI

Reviewer 3: The unit tests in snarkyJS could still block Mina CI, right? Are they not dependent on mina types?

Reviewer 4: I'd say about half, or slightly more, of the existing unit tests don't depend on Mina types. So yeah, we could compile a subset of them from TS to JS without type-checking, and run them as part of the new blocking CI job. We'll have to see what tests exactly we want there.

I think what Brandon describes is the most minimal version that still would cover almost all breaking crypto changes

> * This test will compile and create a recursive proof of one layer using ZkProgram
> * This test will run with type-checking turned off on TypeScript, this way we won't worry about type schema changes

Non-requirements (future work):

* The other SnarkyJS tests are executing automatically by CI somewhere (probably the SnarkyJS repo)

> * The submodule structure is changed -- this should be done carefully in conjunction with moving Pickles and other cryptography layers out of Mina; perhaps we can remove safely remove it altogether

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The submodule structure is changed -- this structure change must be done carefully in conjunction with moving Pickles and other cryptography layers out of Mina; perhaps we can remove safely remove it altogether
```

Hypotheses about how the change meets these needs:

* The tests presented below will not often break with day-to-day zkApp development
* The tests presented below will catch cryptography changes that would otherwise be hard to track and fix during day-to-day SnarkyJS development

In this RFC, we are optimizing for:

* Minimal changes needed to carefully re-enable the important SnarkyJS tests on Mina

## Detailed design
[detailed-design]: #detailed-design

To meet the requirements, it suffices to extract a single creation of an end-to-end recursive proof in type-free SnarkyJS into a separate CI job:

(TODO bkase: Move this to a comment in the test, and link to it in the RFC)
* This test will compile and create a recursive proof of one layer using ZkProgram
* This test will run with type-checking turned off on TypeScript, this way we won't worry about type schema changes
* Since the smart contract interface isn't used, we don't need to worry about anything breaking if transaction or account structure changes

> The existing SnarkyJS will remain unchanged in the "soft-fail" job on the Mina repo.

Reviewer 4: I don't think so! It depends on what workflow we envision:

a) We envision a workflow where the protocol team makes breaking changes without being blocked, but SnarkyJS developers are still _notified_ of a breaking change and will try to fix it within the next week or so. Advantage: We catch breakage as it happens, and always know what PR caused it. In this scenario, the soft-fail test is the necessary signal to notice when to fix something.

b) SnarkyJS development doesn't try to keep up with protocol's changes at all. We only fix up SnarkyJS before a new protocol version is "released" (say, we deploy a new testnet). That implies the soft-fail test in Mina CI will permanently be broken and won't be a useful signal, and you're right that the test is not useful in that case.

I strongly prefer a) over having a huge diff of commits from dozens of PRs and trying to figure out what in that list might have broken something.

I think the relation of submodules is not tied to what checks we want to have in which repo's CI. In snarkyjs CI, we rely on prebuilt bindings artifacts (we don't compile Rust and OCaml from source). Whenever you create new bindings artifacts, you also update a file called `MINA_COMMIT` which logs the Mina commit that the bindings were created from. So, we already have that system you describe for being able to see Mina changes transparently within the snarkyjs history, without relying on git submodules.
